ES|QL dashboard controls in 9.1 (#1917)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/dashboards/add-controls.md

apply to a specific panel, and exposes visualization configuration such as date histogram interval controls to dashboard users.

:::{note}

> Only **Options lists** are supported for ES|QL-based controls. Options can be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only **Options lists** are supported for {{esql}}-based controls. Options can be:
```

nit

> {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.0` Only **Options lists** with static values are supported for ES|QL-based controls.

Reviewer 2: In 9.0 we also support values from a query. the biggest differences from 9.1 are:

-  we now support functions
- the users can create a control first from the controls dropdown

Author: Thanks for the details, I reworked this note in [af5068c](https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/1917/commits/af5068cfbf1ce1607add0b56670e5b6378c08874)

> {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.1` {applies_to}`serverless: ga` Only **Options lists** are supported for ES|QL-based controls. Options can be static values, fields, functions, or values defined by a query.
> 
> {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.0` Only **Options lists** with static values are supported for ES|QL-based controls.

Author: ```suggestion
Only **Options lists** are supported for ES|QL-based controls. Options can be:
- values or fields that can be static or defined by a query
- {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.1` functions
```

:::

1. Use one of the following options to start creating an ES|QL control:
   - {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.1` **From the dashboard Controls menu**: In **Edit** mode, select **Controls** > **Add ES|QL control** in the dashboard toolbar.
   - **From your ES|QL visualization's query**: While editing your ES|QL visualization's query, the autocomplete menu suggests adding a control when relevant or when typing `?` in the query.

   ![ESQL query prompting to add a control](/explore-analyze/images/esql-visualization-control-suggestion.png)

2. A menu opens to let you configure the control. This is where you can specify:

    * The type of the control. 
      * For controls with **Static values**, you select the options available in the controls by entering them manually or by using a dropdown listing available values. 

>       * {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.1` For controls with **Values from a query**, you write an ES|QL query to populate the list of options.

Reviewer 2: This applies to 9.0 too

Author: ```suggestion
      * For controls with **Values from a query**, you write an ES|QL query to populate the list of options.
```
Ok, removing the 9.1 mention.

    * The name of the control. This name is used to reference the control in ES|QL queries. 
      * Start the name with `?` if you want the options to be simple static values.
      * {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.1` Start the name with `??` if you want the options of the control to be fields or functions.

>     * Values available to select for users with this control. You can add multiple values from suggested fields, or type in custom values. If you selected **Values from a query**, you must instead write and ES|QL query at this step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Values available to select for users with this control. You can add multiple values from suggested fields, or type in custom values. If you selected **Values from a query**, you must instead write an ES|QL query at this step.
```
